# Foc_Assessment2

## Introduction:

As part of my Fundamentals of Coding course, we were given this assignment to create a simple console system where the user interacts through text-based commands. By using these commands they should be able to search, print to the screen, sort and add to a generated list of names. The console system should also be password protected and have the ability to log in and out of it.

### Design Process:
 
I had to decide which programming software and language to do this assignment in. I picked Processing 4 with Java as this is what we have been using for the majority of the course and I would be able to create the visuals I wanted for the console system. I created a Trello board as part of my last lecture to help me visualise and plan all the elements needed for this assessment. This helps me to plan out and further assess what would be required before just jumping into creating the system.


### Functionality:

The program is a simple name database which is password protected. Upon opening the program you will be on the login screen, from here you need to enter the password (colleges23) for the system to gain access to the users' list and additional functionality. The password protection uses the input from the user and then checks if it is equal to the required password based on this we then switch a boolean which allows the user into the other elements of the console. If they do not enter the right password we have an error message displaying encouraging them to submit another entry. 

The login screen also has a design element which displays a variety of 1s and 0s falling across the screen in varying transparency. This is achieved by using a class of matrix objects (numbers), this gave each of the objects created their own speed, transparency, size and starting positions across the screen. Also, each object is also given a random number between 1 and 10 to give a 50% chance of each object either being a ‘1’ or a ‘0’. I added all of these objects to an array list which I then looped through and called the object methods Update and Render. 

Update is used to change the y position of each object according to the set speed which is generated based on the objects size when it is created. The program also resets each of the objects' y position once it reaches the bottom of the screen (limit 500) and then resets the y position to 0 and the x position is random across the screen again. This check is done within the Update function and calls the Reset method. Then Render is used to draw each of the elements as part of this design, this puts the text of each element, either a ‘1’ or a ‘0’ on the screen depending on the variable chance.

Once logged in there is the ability to type in commands into the console to perform various tasks outlined below:

**Search Names:** By using the command 'search' space 'users name' the person using the console is able to enter the name of any user they would like to check if they are on the array list. For this, I used a for loop to go through the array list of names and check each name against the input from the user, once a match was found we ‘return’ so the for loop stops as it no longer needs to check the rest of the list. If the user is found we display a user found message by updating the SearchUserResult variable with a success message. Otherwise, the message states that the user was not found. I then have a check on the main page to display this string if it is not empty, the string is also reset to blank once the user starts typing again. 

**Add Names:** By using the command ’add' space 'users name’ the person using the console is able to add any name they would like to the setup array list. In order to get this command to function I added a split functionality as found on the processing reference guide in order to separate the command and the relevant input. I chose to split the input text on a space so that the program checks the first item as the command and then the second part of the split is the name of the user. To avoid errors there is also a check to ensure that the split results in 2 items (Command + Name) for each input of this type to ensure only one name is added at a time. One final check is to ensure that the name part of the split is not empty. Once all these checks are complete and the input is valid we then call the Users class .AddName method to add the name to the array list. Within the .AddName method, I did set a limit of 65 names for this array list size as if there is more than this there is not enough space on the screen to display them all at once. If this limit is not reached then we add the name to the array list. After the name is added we set the NameAdded boolean to true to display a message to the user letting them know their command was successful. 

**Remove User:** By using the command 'remove' space 'users name' the person using the console is able to remove any name from the current name list that they would like. This uses the same checks as the add names command but it looks for the different command reference ‘remove’ instead of ‘add’. Once all these checks are complete and the input is valid we then call the Users class .RemoveName method to remove the name from the array list. After the name is removed we set the NameRemoved boolean to true to display a message to the user letting them know their command was successful. 

**Sort Names:** By using the command 'sort names' the person using the console is able to initialise the sorting algorithm and have this organise the names in the array list into alphabetical order. This algorithm uses a bubble sort. The command check looks for the input “sort names”, if this is inputted then the Users class BubbleSort() method is called. The bubble sort method first gets the size of the array list of names and sets it to a variable called n. I also use a while loop to ensure that all sorting is fully done. To do this while loop I used a boolean called notFinishedSorting and initially set it to true. The while loop begins and I immediately set notFinishedSorting to false in case there are no elements or no sorting needs to be done. A for loop is then used to go through the list of names starting with the first 2. The algorithm continuously compares the names beside each other within the list. The compareTo method is then used which compares the 2 names and if it is greater than 0 this means that the name is greater in value and should be swapped within the list. To do the swap I used a temporary holder for the first name being queries to be moved to called tempName. I then set the second name being compared in the position of the one it was compared to that is now currently being held in tempName. The program now places the value in tempName into the position of the name just swapped. This results in a swap in places within the array list. I then set the notFinishedSorting back to true so the While loop will run again as we know that the list may still need more sorting. After the for loop is done going through the names I reduce n (which was the size of the names list) as the algorithm no longer needs to go sorting through the list all the way to the end as the last name in the list is sorted now. Finally, once the while loop ends I finish off by setting the boolean PrintNames to true which then prints all the names onto the screen after the sorting is complete.

**Print names:** By using the command ‘print names' the person using the console is able to print all the names currently on the array list to the screen so they can view all the names on this list. This used the .GetNames method in User class which returns all the values in the array list of names and we then convert these to text and have them display incremented on the screen using a for loop. When the list of names reaches the bottom of the screen (limit 500) and then resets the y position to 250 and the x position is moved to the right by 100. This is currently limited to 65 names on the screen as referred to above due to the size of the screen created.

**Logout:** By using the command ‘logout’ the person using the console is able to log out of the system and is reverted back to the opening page where they can input the password again and are blocked from any of the additional functionality. Due to the way both of the displays are set up for the logout functionality we just need to set the UserLoggedIn boolean to false.

There is also another log-out button located in the top right-hand corner that works by locating if the mouse was pressed within the rectangular shape it is sitting on. 

### Improvements:

For improvements to this console system if I had more time I would have liked to look into different sorting algorithms and potentially use various sorting other algorithms. As I was constrained for time and wanted to be able to have all elements and the visuals as wanted, I decided to go with the sorting algorithm we had used and discussed in a prior lecture. 

I struggled with the caps lock functionality in order to have it so that when a user presses the caps lock button that it was not included as an entry into the input of the console. I as a result reverted the first letter of the password and all the command functions into lowercase for this program. I would like to have been able to look into this further and have better resources online in order to investigate and solve this on the program.

If I had more time I would have liked to have been able to have if the user was using the remove functionality and there is no matching user already on the array list an error message would display stating that no matching user could be found and as such removed.

I would have also liked to have been able to look further into the array list and discover if there was a way to bypass the limit in space for printing the array to the screen. At the moment with the current size of the console, I noticed a limit of only 65 names could be printed to the screen and as such added restraints to ensure the array list adhered to this but this would not be scalable and as such limits the codes usage. It would have been investing to see what kind of workaround would have been possible for this such as the console flicking between pages of names or if a scroll functionality would have been possible. 
